docs: Installation Guide for ClusterLink (#184)
clusterlink-net/clusterlink: docs/Installation.md

# Installation Guide for ClusterLink
The ClusterLink gateway contains three main components: the control-plane, data-plane, and gwctl (more details can be found [here](../README.md#what-is-clusterlink)).

ClusterLink can be deployed in a local environment (e.g., Kind) or any remote K8s cluster environment (e.g., google GKE, amazon EKS, IBM IKS, etc.).

To deploy the ClusterLink gateway in a K8s cluster, follow these steps:

1. Create and deploy certificates and the ClusterLink deployment YAML file.
2. Expose the ClusterLink deployment to a public IP.
3. Optionally, create a central gwctl component to control one or more gateways.

Before you begin, please build the project according to the [instructions](../README.md#building-clustelink).

> ### 1. ClusterLink deployment and certificates

Reviewer: nit: 
- be inconsistent with other headings (e.g.,  `Installation Guide for ClusterLink` above)
- skipping two heading levels (from `#` to `###`)?

In this step, we create the ClusterLink certificates and deployment files.

1) Create a folder (eg. DEPLOY_DIR) for all deployments and yaml files:

        export PROJECT_DIR=`git rev-parse --show-toplevel`
        export DEPLOY_DIR=~/clusterlink-deployment
        mkdir -p $DEPLOY_DIR
        cd $DEPLOY_DIR

> 2) Create Fabric certificates, including the Root CA certificate for all the clusters (This step needs to be done only once per fabric).:

Reviewer: nit: use Fabric or fabric consistently (here as well as in other places in the doc)

        $PROJECT_DIR/bin/cl-adm create fabric

>     Note: This step needs to be done only once per fabric.

Reviewer: nit: "only once" already appears on L23?

3) Create certificates and a deployment file for the cluster (e.g., peer1):

        $PROJECT_DIR/bin/cl-adm create peer --name peer1

>     Note: By default, the images are pulled from ghcr.io/clusterlink-net. To change the container registry, you can use the ```--container-registry``` flag.  

Reviewer: qq: is ghcr.io where we upload images to? I was under the impression that we wanted to use quay.io?

Author: Yes, but in the last meeting, @zivnevo propose to use ghcr so we add automation (upload new image per release).

    This step needs to be performed for every K8s cluster.

4) Apply ClusterLink deployment:
   
        kubectl apply -f $DEPLOY_DIR/peer1/k8s.yaml

5) Verify that all components (cl-controlplane, cl-dataplane, gwctl) are set up and ready.
   
        kubectl rollout status deployment cl-controlplane
        kubectl rollout status deployment cl-dataplane

>         kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod -l app=gwctl 

Reviewer: isn't gwctl optional?
include example output that indicates deployments are ready?

### 2. Expose the ClusterLink deployment to a public IP
Create a public IP for accessing the ClusterLink gateway.

> For a local environment create a K8s nodeport service:

Reviewer: local == KIND?

        kubectl apply -f $PROJECT_DIR/demos/utils/manifests/kind/cl-svc.yaml
        export PEER1_IP=`kubectl get nodes -o "jsonpath={.items[0].status.addresses[0].address}"`
        export PEER1_PORT=443

> For a remote environment:

Reviewer: remote == cloud?
It is not fully clear.

1. First, create a K8s LoadBalancer service:
    ```
    kubectl expose deployment cl-dataplane --name=cl-dataplane-load-balancer --port=443 --target-port=443 --type=LoadBalancer
    ```

2. Retrieve the LoadBalancer IP when it is allocated:
    ```
    export PEER1_IP=$(kubectl get svc -l app=cl-dataplane -o jsonpath="{.items[0].status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}")
    export PEER1_PORT=443
    ```

Now, the ClusterLink gateway can be accessed through `$PEER1_IP` at port  `$PEER1_PORT`.

### 3. Create a central gwctl (optional)

> By default for each K8s cluster a gwctl pod is created that use REST APIs to send control messages to the

Reviewer: this behavior is non standard and (IMHO) should be discouraged - you don't see `kubectl` installed into clusters...
I would remove this from manifests unless there's good reason to keep it

Author: The problem is that for Mac users, using gwctl on local machines cause some issues as @michalmalka  and @huang195 experienced.

Reviewer 2: > The problem is that for Mac users, using gwctl on local machines cause some issues as @michalmalka and @huang195 experienced.

Is there an issue for that? What error are they getting?

Reviewer 3: I think that was only on KIND environment.

ClusterLink gateway, using the command:

    kubectl exec -i <gwctl_pod> -- gwctl <command>

To create a single gwctl that controls one or more ClusterLink gateways, follow these steps:

1. Install the local control (gwctl):

    ```

>     sudo make install

Reviewer: I think installing into `/usr` is too intrusive and would not recommend it (I plan on removing this make target at a later stage). It can be anywhere in the path (e.g., if using Go then `$GOPATH/bin` is a better location...)

Author: Ok but we still need to run this command

    ```

2. Initialize the gwctl CLI for the cluster (e.g., peer1):
    ```
    gwctl init --id "peer1" --gwIP $PEER1_IP --gwPort 30443 --certca $DEPLOY_DIR/cert.pem --cert $DEPLOY_DIR/peer1/gwctl/cert.pem --key
    ```

> 

Reviewer: nit: 
- are `"`s around `peer1` required?
- please consider adding a line explaining how to switch between gateways

> ## Additional Setup Modes

Reviewer: nit: I think markdown lint prefers empty lines before/after headers. This applies to the file in general, not just here

> # Installation Guide for ClusterLink

Reviewer: Only specific files should be upper cases, not all markdowns.
These are typically the "process" files in the toplevel directory (e.g., LICENSE, CONTRIBUTING, CODEOWNERS, README, etc - note that not all are markdown) and are upper cases so they appear first (`A` < `a`...).
This one can remain as is, in lower case.

> # Installation Guide for ClusterLink

Reviewer 2: So let's rename to `installation.md`?

> # Installation Guide for ClusterLink

Author: OK

The ClusterLink gateway contains three main components: the control-plane, data-plane, and gwctl (more details can be found [here](../README.md#what-is-clusterlink)).

ClusterLink can be deployed in a local environment (Kind) or any remote K8s cluster environment (GKE, EKS, IBM-K8S, etc.).

To deploy the ClusterLink gateway in a K8s cluster, follow these steps:

1. Create and deploy certificates and the ClusterLink Deployment file.
2. Expose the ClusterLink deployment to a public IP.

> 3. Optionally, create a central gwctl component to control all gateways.

Author: Yes, we use it locally, but it can be where ever you want.

Before you begin, please clone and build the project according to the [instructions](../README.md#building-clustelink).
### 1. ClusterLink Deployment and certificates.
In this step, we build the ClusterLink certificates and deployment files.

1) Create a folder (eg. TEST_DIR) for all deployments and yaml files:

        export PROJECT_DIR=`git rev-parse --show-toplevel`

>         export TEST_DIR=$PROJECT_DIR/bin/test/

Reviewer 2: Why example is put it on project dir?
Also, I would rename `TEST_DIR` to `DEPLOY_DIR`.
I suggest using `export TEST_DIR=~/clusterlink-deployment`

        mkdir -p $TEST_DIR
        cd $TEST_DIR

> 2) Create Fabric certificates, including the Root CA certificate for all the clusters (This step needs to be done only once per fabric).:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2) Create fabric certificate, which is the root CA certificate for all the clusters:
```

        $PROJECT_DIR/bin/cl-adm create fabric

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

    Note: This step needs to be done only once per fabric.
```

> 3) Create certificates and a deployment file for the cluster (e.g., peer1). This step needs to be performed for every K8s cluster.:

Reviewer 2: Move "this step..." to a note after the command.

        $PROJECT_DIR/bin/cl-adm create peer --name peer1

    Note: By default, the images are pulled from ghcr.io/clusterlink-net. To change the container registry, you can use the ```--container-registry``` flag.

4) Apply ClusterLink deployment:
   
        kubectl apply -f $TEST_DIR/peer1/k8s.yaml

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

5) Verify that all components (cl-controlplane, cl-dataplane, gwctl) are set up and ready.
   

>         kubectl get pods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        kubectl rollout status deployment cl-controlplane
        kubectl rollout status deployment cl-dataplane
        kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod -l app=gwctl 
```

### 2. Expose the ClusterLink deployment to a public IP

> Create public IP for accessing the ClusterLink gateway.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a public IP for accessing the ClusterLink gateway.
```

> For Local environment create a K8s nodeport service:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a local environment create a K8s nodeport service:
```

>         kubectl apply -f $PROJECT_DIR/demos/utils/manifests/kind/cl-svc.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        kubectl expose service cl-dataplane --type=NodePort --name=cl-dataplane-nodeport
```
Also, missing some `export PEER1_PORT=`kubectl get service cl-dataplane-nodeport -o "jsonpath=?"`

Author: Did you try this? it is not working...  the nodeport  field is missing

Reviewer 2: I left it for your to figure out :)
But anyhow, this works:
```
export PEER1_PORT=`kubectl get service cl-dataplane-nodeport -o "jsonpath={.spec.ports[0].nodePort}"``
```

        export PEER1_IP=`kubectl get nodes -o "jsonpath={.items[0].status.addresses[0].address}"`

For a remote environment:

1. First, create a K8s LoadBalancer service:
    ```
    kubectl expose deployment cl-dataplane --name=cl-dataplane-load-balancer --port=443 --target-port=443 --type=LoadBalancer
    ```

2. Retrieve the LoadBalancer IP when it is allocated:
    ```

>     export PEER1_IP=$(kubectl get svc -l app=cl-dataplane -o jsonpath="{.items[0].status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    export PEER1_IP=$(kubectl get svc -l app=cl-dataplane -o jsonpath="{.items[0].status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}")
    export PEER1_PORT=443
```

    ```

> Now, the ClusterLink gateway can be accessed through `$PEER1_IP` at port 443.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, the ClusterLink gateway can be accessed through `$PEER1_IP` at port `$PEER1_PORT`.
```

> ### 3. Create central gwctl (optional)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 3. Create a central gwctl (optional)
```

> By default for each K8s cluster a gwctl pod is created that use REST APIs to send control messages to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, a gwctl pod is created for each K8s cluster. This pod can be used to send REST API control messages to the
```

> ClusterLink Gateway, using the command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ClusterLink gateway, using the command:
```

>     kubectl exec -i <gwctl_pod> -- gwctl <the command>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    kubectl exec -i <gwctl_pod> -- gwctl <command>
```

To create a single gwctl that controls all ClusterLink gateways, follow these steps:

1. Install the local control (gwctl):

    ```
    sudo make install
    ```

2. Initialize the gwctl CLI for the cluster (e.g., peer1):
    ```

>     gwctl init --id "peer1" --gwIP $PEER1_IP --gwPort 30443 --certca $TEST_DIR/cert.pem --cert $TEST_DIR/peer1/gwctl/cert.pem --key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    gwctl init --id "peer1" --gwIP $PEER1_IP --gwPort $PEER1_PORT --certca $TEST_DIR/cert.pem --cert $TEST_DIR/peer1/gwctl/cert.pem --key $TEST_DIR/peer1/gwctl/key.pem
```

    ```

## Additional Setup Modes
### Debug mode

> To run ClusterLink component in debug mode, use ```--log-level``` flag when creating the ClusterLink deployment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run ClusterLink components in debug mode, use ```--log-level``` flag when creating the ClusterLink deployment
```
